psa_apitesting/README.md, before:

# API Testing [PortSwigger Academy]

<sup>This write-up covers the API Testing section of Web Security Academy by PortSwigger.</sup>

## API Recon

_Discover API's attack surface_ --- Find out as much information about API as possible.

_API endpoints_ --- These are locations where API receives requests about a specific resource on its server.

_Example `GET` request_:

```
GET /api/books HTTP/1.1
Host: example.com
```

_API endpoint_: `/api/books`. This, in theory should return a list of all books on API's server. While `/api/books/mystery` endpoint should return all books in `mystery` category.

_Interaction with API_:

- What input data does the API process? What compulsory parameters? What optional parameters? 
  * _An example_: Say, our api endpoint is `GET /weather` which returns weather in a given location. `location` parameter is __required__, the example value of it could be `"New York"`. __Optional__ parameters could be `units` with value `metric|imperial`, `lang` with value `en|fr|es`, `forecast_days` with value `1-10`. So the final API call could like like this: `GET /weather?location=London&units=metric&lang=en&forecast_days=4`.
- What types of requests does API accept? What HTTP methods? Which media formats?
  * _An example_: Using the above example, in `GET /weather` an __HTTP method__ would be `GET`. It could also be `POST`, `PUT`, `DELETE`, etc. The __media formats__ are also referred to as __MIME types__ or __content types__ describe how the data is formatted when it's sent to or from the API. This information shows up in __HTTP headers__, mainly in `Content-Type` or `Accept` and value is typically `application/json` but it could be something else, depending on the API and which __media formats__ it accepts.
- What rate limits are applied? What authentication mechanisms are enforced?
  * _An example_: Both of these are __HTTP headers__ just like __media formats__. Typically they looks like `Authorization: Bearer <token>` and `X-RateLimit-Limit: 100` or `X-RateLimit-Remaining: 50` or `X-RateLimit-Reset: 213123123`, etc. The idea is, that most APIs don't let you use them freely, so you have to __authenticate__ with an _API key_, _Bearer Token_, _Basic Auth_, _OAuth 2.0_, _JWT_, etc. As an authenticated or unauthenticated user, an API also typically controls how many requests you are allowed to make to the API in a given time period, could be anything from _1000/day_ to _100/minute_.

## API Documentation

_API Documentation_ --- A way for developers to understand how to use an API through a set of technical descriptions of endpoints and calls. It can be in both machine-readable and human-readable forms. Machine-readable documentation is designed for the software to automate integration and validation of the API with itself. It is usually written in a structured format like JSON or XML. 

_Availablity_ --- API documentation is usually publicly available, especially if it's intended for the use by external developers. In such cases the reconnaissance should begin with reviewing said documentation.

### Discovering API documentation

In cases when the API documentation isn't available, it is usually accessed or found by browsing applications that use the API. Tools such as __Burp Scanner__ can be used to crawl the API. Using __Burp Browser__ we can also manually browse the application and find endpoints in the requests saved in Burp Suite that might refer to the API documentation. 

In case we identified an endpoint for the resource of an API, then we need to investigate its base path. For example in case we identified the resource endpoint `/api/swagger/v1/users/123` we need to browse every level of this path and see what it returns:

- `/api/swagger/v1/users`
- `/api/swagger/v1`
- `/api/swagger`
- `/api`

__Burp Suite__'s __Intruder__ can also be used with a list of common paths to find the documentation. 

### Lab: Exploiting an API endpoint using documentation

Turn on Burp Suite and access the lab using Burp Suite's browser. 

Log in to the application with credentials `wiener:peter` and update email address.

In Burp Suite -> Proxy -> HTTP history, navigate the list of requests and find `PATCH /api/user/wiener` request. Right click on it and click __Send to Repeater__.

Going to the __Repeater__ tab if you send this request once, it will return the credentials for user `wiener`:

```
HTTP/2 200 OK
Content-Type: application/json; charset=utf-8
X-Content-Type-Options: nosniff
X-Frame-Options: SAMEORIGIN
Content-Length: 53

{
  "username":"wiener",
  "email":"attacker@fakemail.com"
}
```

If we remove `/wiener` from the request path and send the request with endpoint `/api/user` it will return an error because there is no user identifier:

```
HTTP/2 400 Bad Request
Content-Type: application/json; charset=utf-8
X-Content-Type-Options: nosniff
X-Frame-Options: SAMEORIGIN
Content-Length: 50

{
  "error":"Malformed URL: expecting an identifier"
}
```

This time if we remove `/user` as well from the path and send the request with endpoint `/api` it will return the API documentation. To see it, right-click on the response and click __Show response in browser__. The following will show up:

![API documentation](psa_apitesting_ss01.png "API documentation")

Now click on the `DELETE` row and enter carlos in the username field and click send request. Notice how a `curl` command is generated to achieve the same purpose:

```bash
curl -vgw "\n" -X DELETE 'https://0a0{.....}02a.web-security-academy.net/api/user/carlos' -d '{}'
```

- _`-v` --- Verbose mode --- This tells `curl` to show detailed info about the request and response, including request headers, response headers, connection status, etc.

- _`-g` --- (disable URL globbing) Globoff --- Disables special character expansion like `{}` and `[]` in URLs. Useful if you're passing those characters literally (which you are here in the `-d '{}'` part).

- `-w "\n"` --- Write-out --- This lets you format the output from curl after the request. Here, you're just asking `curl` to print a newline (`\n`) after the response.

- `-X DELETE` --- Specifies the HTTP method --- You're explicitly telling curl to send a `DELETE` request, effectively asking the server to remove a resource.

- `'https://.../api/user/carlos'` --- The API endpoint URL --- This is the target resource --- an API that likely handles users. You're sending a `DELETE` request to remove the user `carlos`.

- `-d '{}'` --- The request body --- Even though DELETE requests often don't require a body, some APIs expect an empty JSON object `{}` or some kind of payload. If you omit `-d`, some APIs might reject the request or default to `GET`.

The lab is solved now!

Commit message:

API Testing | API Documentation | zaproxy version

psa_apitesting/README.md, after:

# API Testing [PortSwigger Academy]

<sup>This write-up covers the API Testing section of Web Security Academy by PortSwigger.</sup>

## API Recon

_Discover API's attack surface_ --- Find out as much information about API as possible.

_API endpoints_ --- These are locations where API receives requests about a specific resource on its server.

_Example `GET` request_:

```
GET /api/books HTTP/1.1
Host: example.com
```

_API endpoint_: `/api/books`. This, in theory should return a list of all books on API's server. While `/api/books/mystery` endpoint should return all books in `mystery` category.

_Interaction with API_:

- What input data does the API process? What compulsory parameters? What optional parameters? 
  * _An example_: Say, our api endpoint is `GET /weather` which returns weather in a given location. `location` parameter is __required__, the example value of it could be `"New York"`. __Optional__ parameters could be `units` with value `metric|imperial`, `lang` with value `en|fr|es`, `forecast_days` with value `1-10`. So the final API call could like like this: `GET /weather?location=London&units=metric&lang=en&forecast_days=4`.
- What types of requests does API accept? What HTTP methods? Which media formats?
  * _An example_: Using the above example, in `GET /weather` an __HTTP method__ would be `GET`. It could also be `POST`, `PUT`, `DELETE`, etc. The __media formats__ are also referred to as __MIME types__ or __content types__ describe how the data is formatted when it's sent to or from the API. This information shows up in __HTTP headers__, mainly in `Content-Type` or `Accept` and value is typically `application/json` but it could be something else, depending on the API and which __media formats__ it accepts.
- What rate limits are applied? What authentication mechanisms are enforced?
  * _An example_: Both of these are __HTTP headers__ just like __media formats__. Typically they looks like `Authorization: Bearer <token>` and `X-RateLimit-Limit: 100` or `X-RateLimit-Remaining: 50` or `X-RateLimit-Reset: 213123123`, etc. The idea is, that most APIs don't let you use them freely, so you have to __authenticate__ with an _API key_, _Bearer Token_, _Basic Auth_, _OAuth 2.0_, _JWT_, etc. As an authenticated or unauthenticated user, an API also typically controls how many requests you are allowed to make to the API in a given time period, could be anything from _1000/day_ to _100/minute_.

## API Documentation

_API Documentation_ --- A way for developers to understand how to use an API through a set of technical descriptions of endpoints and calls. It can be in both machine-readable and human-readable forms. Machine-readable documentation is designed for the software to automate integration and validation of the API with itself. It is usually written in a structured format like JSON or XML. 

_Availablity_ --- API documentation is usually publicly available, especially if it's intended for the use by external developers. In such cases the reconnaissance should begin with reviewing said documentation.

### Discovering API documentation

In cases when the API documentation isn't available, it is usually accessed or found by browsing applications that use the API. Tools such as __Burp Scanner__ can be used to crawl the API. Using __Burp Browser__ we can also manually browse the application and find endpoints in the requests saved in Burp Suite that might refer to the API documentation. 

In case we identified an endpoint for the resource of an API, then we need to investigate its base path. For example in case we identified the resource endpoint `/api/swagger/v1/users/123` we need to browse every level of this path and see what it returns:

- `/api/swagger/v1/users`
- `/api/swagger/v1`
- `/api/swagger`
- `/api`

__Burp Suite__'s __Intruder__ can also be used with a list of common paths to find the documentation. 

### Lab: Exploiting an API endpoint using documentation

Turn on Burp Suite and access the lab using Burp Suite's browser. 

Log in to the application with credentials `wiener:peter` and update email address.

In Burp Suite -> Proxy -> HTTP history, navigate the list of requests and find `PATCH /api/user/wiener` request. Right click on it and click __Send to Repeater__.

Going to the __Repeater__ tab if you send this request once, it will return the credentials for user `wiener`:

```
HTTP/2 200 OK
Content-Type: application/json; charset=utf-8
X-Content-Type-Options: nosniff
X-Frame-Options: SAMEORIGIN
Content-Length: 53

{
  "username":"wiener",
  "email":"attacker@fakemail.com"
}
```

If we remove `/wiener` from the request path and send the request with endpoint `/api/user` it will return an error because there is no user identifier:

```
HTTP/2 400 Bad Request
Content-Type: application/json; charset=utf-8
X-Content-Type-Options: nosniff
X-Frame-Options: SAMEORIGIN
Content-Length: 50

{
  "error":"Malformed URL: expecting an identifier"
}
```

This time if we remove `/user` as well from the path and send the request with endpoint `/api` it will return the API documentation. To see it, right-click on the response and click __Show response in browser__. The following will show up:

![API documentation](psa_apitesting_ss01.png "API documentation")

Now click on the `DELETE` row and enter carlos in the username field and click send request. Notice how a `curl` command is generated to achieve the same purpose:

```bash
curl -vgw "\n" -X DELETE 'https://0a0{.....}02a.web-security-academy.net/api/user/carlos' -d '{}'
```

- _`-v` --- Verbose mode --- This tells `curl` to show detailed info about the request and response, including request headers, response headers, connection status, etc._

- _`-g` --- (disable URL globbing) Globoff --- Disables special character expansion like `{}` and `[]` in URLs. Useful if you're passing those characters literally (which you are here in the `-d '{}'` part)._

- _`-w "\n"` --- Write-out --- This lets you format the output from curl after the request. Here, you're just asking `curl` to print a newline (`\n`) after the response._

- _`-X DELETE` --- Specifies the HTTP method --- You're explicitly telling curl to send a `DELETE` request, effectively asking the server to remove a resource._

- _`'https://.../api/user/carlos'` --- The API endpoint URL --- This is the target resource --- an API that likely handles users. You're sending a `DELETE` request to remove the user `carlos`._

- _`-d '{}'` --- The request body --- Even though DELETE requests often don't require a body, some APIs expect an empty JSON object `{}` or some kind of payload. If you omit `-d`, some APIs might reject the request or default to `GET`._

The lab is solved now!

> NOTE: Check out [walkthrough](apitesting_lab01_zaproxy.md) of this lab in OWASP Zed Attack Proxy.

### Using machine-readable documentation

There are a lot of automated tools available to analyze machine-readable API documentation.
